OSASINFRA-3516: Document correlated observability (#9046)
openshift/installer: docs/user/openstack/observability.md

# Observability of OpenShift on OpenStack

This document explains how it is possible to correlate OpenStack and OpenShift
metrics to have a better view of the stack and help troubleshoot issues
affecting your clusters.

## Make your OpenStack and OpenShift metrics available from the same metric store

As a first step, you should setup a metric store instance to have access to both
OpenStack and OpenShift metrics.

There are a number of ways to get your metrics from the same instance. We'll
document two of them: using Prometheus' remote-write to send the metrics to
another instance, and using the federation endpoint to query metrics from

> a different instance.

Reviewer: IMO the original text conveys the general idea better. We'll get into specifics in each appropriate section.

    openssl genrsa -out "${target}.key" 4096
    openssl req -batch -new -key "${target}.key" -out "${target}.csr"
    openssl x509 -req -CA ca.crt -CAkey ca.key -CAcreateserial -in "${target}.csr" -out "${target}.crt"
done
```

Prometheus UI should be available at https://external-prometheus.example
-->

#### Set up remote-write from RHOSO's telemetry-operator

Telemetry should already be enabled in the RHOSO environment. If this not yet
the case, refer to the
[documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openstack_services_on_openshift/18.0/html/customizing_the_red_hat_openstack_services_on_openshift_deployment/rhoso-observability_custom_dataplane#rhoso-observability_rhoso-observability).

> [!NOTE]
Make sure you have the Cluster Observability Operator installed in the OpenShift cluster running the OpenStack control plane, as this is a requirement for the OpenStack Telemetry Operator. Follow [these directions](https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/architecture/blob/main/examples/dt/uni01alpha/control-plane.md#cluster-observability-operator) to install it.

To confirm that the Telemetry Operator is correctly running, follow these steps

> // TODO: provide steps to ensure telemetry operator is installed and running

Author: ~~~suggestion
To check that the telemetry machinery is correctly installed, you can issue this command:

```bash
oc -n openstack get monitoringstacks metric-storage -o yaml
```

The `monitoringstacks` CRD being installed is a good indicator that telemetry is functional.
~~~

                  secret:
                    name: mtls-bundle
                    key: ocp-client.crt
                keySecret:
                  name: mtls-bundle
                  key: ocp-client.key
            replicas: 2
          resourceSelector:
            matchLabels:
              service: metricStorage
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: 500m
              memory: 512Mi
            requests:
              cpu: 100m
              memory: 256Mi
          retention: 1h
        dashboardsEnabled: false
        dataplaneNetwork: ctlplane
        enabled: true
        prometheusTls: {}
```

After saving the file and letting the change propagate, verify that you receive
metrics in the external Prometheus.

#### Set up remote-write from the OCP cluster-monitoring-operator

Documented [here](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#configuring_remote_write_storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack).

You may want to label the cluster metrics with a cluster identifier.

Optionally, since metrics will be collected externally, you can set a reduced retention for local metrics.

> The resulting `cluster-monitoring-config` ConfigMap should then resemble this:

Author: Since the above is just suggestions:

```suggestion
The resulting `cluster-monitoring-config` ConfigMap could then resemble this:
```

            secret:
              name: mtls-bundle
              key: ca.crt
          cert:
            secret:
              name: mtls-bundle
              key: ocp-client.crt
          keySecret:
            name: mtls-bundle
            key: ocp-client.key
```

Save it to a file named `cluster-monitoring-config.yaml`. Before applying it,
create the secret containing the HTTPS client certificates, similar to what we
did for RHOSO.

```bash
oc --namespace openshift-monitoring \
    create secret generic mtls-bundle \
        --from-file=./ca.crt \
        --from-file=ocp-client.crt \
        --from-file=ocp-client.key
```

Once you have created the secret, it's time to apply the cluster-monitoring configuration:

```bash
oc apply -f cluster-monitoring-config.yaml
```

Let the change propagate and verify that you receive metrics in the external
Prometheus.

### Querying OCP metrics together with RHOSO's

As an alternative to write the different metrics to a single store, it's
possible to query remote metric stores instead.

OpenShift exposes a federation endpoint to enable queries originating from
outside the cluster to include OpenShift cluster monitoring data. You can

> follow [these instructions][federation] to set it up.

Author: ```suggestion
follow [these instructions][federation] to get acquainted to the endpoint.
```

[federation]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.16/html/monitoring/accessing-third-party-monitoring-apis#monitoring-querying-metrics-by-using-the-federation-endpoint-for-prometheus_accessing-monitoring-apis-by-using-the-cli "OpenShift documentation: Querying metrics by using the federation endpoint for Prometheus"

> 

Author: ~~~suggestion

#### Step 1: Gather credentials and coordinates

While connected to the OpenShift cluster through a username identified by password (as opposed to logging in using the `kubeconfig` file generated by the installer), fetch a token:

```bash
TOKEN=$(oc whoami -t)
```

Then get the Prometheus federation route URL:

```bash
HOST=$(oc -n openshift-monitoring get route prometheus-k8s-federate -ojsonpath={.status.ingress[].host})
```

#### Let RHOSO scrape OpenShift's federation endpoint

It is recommended to limit scraping to fewer than 1000 samples for each request, and with a maximum frequency of once every 30 seconds.

In this example, we will request two metrics: `kube_node_info` and `kube_persistentvolume_info`.

While connected to the RHOSO cluster, apply this manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.rhobs/v1alpha1
kind: ScrapeConfig
metadata:
  labels:
    service: metricStorage
  name: sos1-federated
  namespace: openstack
spec:
  params:
    'match[]':
    - '{__name__=~"kube_node_info|kube_persistentvolume_info"}'
  metricsPath: '/federate'
  authorization:
    type: Bearer
    credentials:
      name: ocp-federated
      key: token
  scheme: HTTPS # or HTTP
  scrapeInterval: 30s
  staticConfigs:
  - targets:
    - prometheus-k8s-federate-openshift-monitoring.apps.openshift.example # This is the $HOST variable fetched previously
  # add a tlsConfig stanza if the endpoint is HTTPS and if using a custom CA
```

Don't forget to make the token available as a secret (in the example above, the name is `ocp-federated`):

```bash
-n openstack ceate secret generic ocp-federated --from-literal=token=sha256~xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
```
~~~

metrics to have a better view of the stack and help troubleshoot issues
affecting your clusters.

## Make your OpenStack and OpenShift metrics available from the same metric store

As a first step, you should setup a metric store instance to have access to both
OpenStack and OpenShift metrics.

There are a number of ways to get your metrics from the same instance. We'll
document two of them: using Prometheus' remote-write to send the metrics to
another instance, and using the federation endpoint to query metrics from
a different instance.

### Using remote-write to send RHOSO and OCP metrics to an external storage

#### Set up the external storage

In this example, we'll use an external storage to store the metrics. We'll
assume that the external storage is another Prometheus instance.

We will set up remote-write from both OpenStack and OpenShift, authenticating them with mTLS
(mutual TLS). The target Prometheus needs to be configured to [accept client TLS
certificates](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/https/),
and [remote write](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/storage/#overview).

<!--

> For testing purpose, we can do the following:

Reviewer 2: I can't see these steps generated in the docs. I find it useful to have them listed
https://github.com/shiftstack/installer/blob/document_correlated_observability/docs/user/openstack/observability.md

Author: They are commented (with HTML comments (Markdown is a strict superset of HTML!)) because we target production setups in the docs, and this is just for testing. I think we will leave it there commented for the really curious.

`monitoringStack` one. Replace the `metricStorage` structure with one that
looks like this:

```yaml
      metricStorage:
        customMonitoringStack:
          alertmanagerConfig:
            disabled: false
          logLevel: info
          prometheusConfig:
            scrapeInterval: 30s
            remoteWrite:
            - url: https://external-prometheus.example/api/v1/write
              tlsConfig:
                ca:
                  secret:
                    name: mtls-bundle
                    key: ca.crt
                cert:
                  secret:
                    name: mtls-bundle
                    key: ocp-client.crt
                keySecret:
                  name: mtls-bundle
                  key: ocp-client.key
            replicas: 2
          resourceSelector:
            matchLabels:
              service: metricStorage
          resources:
            limits:
              cpu: 500m
              memory: 512Mi
            requests:
              cpu: 100m
              memory: 256Mi
          retention: 1h
        dashboardsEnabled: false
        dataplaneNetwork: ctlplane
        enabled: true
        prometheusTls: {}
```

> After saving the file and letting the change propagate, verify that you receive

Reviewer 2: might be worth mentioning that the external Prometheus is https://external-prometheus.example

Author: it's there at around line 70

> metrics in the external Prometheus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OpenStack metrics in the external Prometheus.
```

    prometheusK8s:
      retention: 1h
      remoteWrite:
      - url: "https://external-prometheus.example/api/v1/write"
        writeRelabelConfigs:
        - sourceLabels:
          - __tmp_openshift_cluster_id__
          targetLabel: <your_cluster_id>
          action: replace
        tlsConfig:
          ca:
            secret:
              name: mtls-bundle
              key: ca.crt
          cert:
            secret:
              name: mtls-bundle
              key: ocp-client.crt
          keySecret:
            name: mtls-bundle
            key: ocp-client.key
```

Save it to a file named `cluster-monitoring-config.yaml`. Before applying it,
create the secret containing the HTTPS client certificates, similar to what we
did for RHOSO. We're still calling the secret `mtls-bundle`, but this time in
the `openshift-monitoring` namespace:

```bash
oc --namespace openshift-monitoring \
    create secret generic mtls-bundle \
        --from-file=./ca.crt \
        --from-file=ocp-client.crt \
        --from-file=ocp-client.key
```

Once you have created the secret, it's time to apply the cluster-monitoring configuration:

```bash
oc apply -f cluster-monitoring-config.yaml
```

> Let the change propagate and verify that you receive metrics in the external

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let the change propagate and verify that you receive OpenShift metrics in the external
```

```

#### Let RHOSO scrape OpenShift's federation endpoint

It is recommended to limit scraping to fewer than 1000 samples for each request, and with a maximum frequency of once every 30 seconds.

In this example, we will request two metrics: `kube_node_info` and `kube_persistentvolume_info`.

While connected to the RHOSO cluster, apply this manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.rhobs/v1alpha1
kind: ScrapeConfig
metadata:
  labels:
    service: metricStorage
  name: sos1-federated
  namespace: openstack
spec:
  params:
    'match[]':
    - '{__name__=~"kube_node_info|kube_persistentvolume_info"}'
  metricsPath: '/federate'
  authorization:
    type: Bearer
    credentials:
      name: ocp-federated
      key: token
  scheme: HTTPS # or HTTP
  scrapeInterval: 30s
  staticConfigs:
  - targets:
    - prometheus-k8s-federate-openshift-monitoring.apps.openshift.example # This is the $HOST variable fetched previously
  # add a tlsConfig stanza if the endpoint is HTTPS and if using a custom CA
```

Don't forget to make the token available as a secret (in the example above, the name is `ocp-federated`):

```bash

> -n openstack ceate secret generic ocp-federated --from-literal=token=sha256~xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

Reviewer 2: incomplete command?

```Caddyfile
https://external-prometheus.example {

    basicauth {
        # caddy hash-password
        user hashed-password
    }

    reverse_proxy http://localhost:9090
}
```
-->

We will assume that the external Prometheus is reachable at the URL
`https://external-prometheus.example`.

#### Set up remote-write from RHOSO's telemetry-operator

Telemetry should be enabled in the RHOSO environment. If it is not the case,
refer to the
[documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openstack_services_on_openshift/18.0/html/customizing_the_red_hat_openstack_services_on_openshift_deployment/rhoso-observability_custom_dataplane#rhoso-observability_rhoso-observability).

<!--
Essentially, enabling telemetry boils down to flipping a property of the
openstackcontrolplane object:

```bash
oc patch OpenStackControlPlane/controlplane --type merge -p '{"spec":{"telemetry":{"enabled": true, "template":{"ceilometer":{"enabled": true}}}}}'
```
-->

> [!NOTE]
Make sure you have the Cluster Observability Operator installed in the
OpenShift cluster running the OpenStack control plane, as this is a requirement
for the OpenStack Telemetry Operator. Follow [these

> directions](https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/architecture/blob/main/examples/dt/uni01alpha/control-plane.md#cluster-observability-operator)

Reviewer: Ideally we would point to the osasinfra DT, but https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/architecture/pull/418 hasn't merged yet.

Author: Can you please point me to the osasinfra DT?

[create_cluster_monitoring_config]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#creating-cluster-monitoring-configmap_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Creating a cluster monitoring config map"
[setup_remote_write]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#configuring-remote-write-storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Configuring remote write storage"
[add_labels]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#adding-cluster-id-labels-to-metrics_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Adding cluster ID labels to metrics"

### Method B: Scrap OCP metrics from RHOSO

As an alternative to write the different metrics to a single store, it's
possible to concentrate the storage of metrics to RHOSO's existing
telemetry-operator.

OpenShift exposes a federation endpoint to expose a subset of metrics to an
external scraper. You can follow [these instructions][federation] to get
acquainted to the endpoint.

> [federation]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.16/html/monitoring/accessing-third-party-monitoring-apis#monitoring-querying-metrics-by-using-the-federation-endpoint-for-prometheus_accessing-monitoring-apis-by-using-the-cli "OpenShift documentation: Querying metrics by using the federation endpoint for Prometheus"

Reviewer: Can you change the link to point to the latest OCP release?

Author: I'll give you 4.17 last offer

```bash
oc apply -f cluster-monitoring-config.yaml
```

Let the change propagate and verify that you receive OpenShift metrics in the
external Prometheus.

[ocp_docs]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#configuring_remote_write_storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Configuring the monitoring stack"
[create_cluster_monitoring_config]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#creating-cluster-monitoring-configmap_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Creating a cluster monitoring config map"
[setup_remote_write]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#configuring-remote-write-storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Configuring remote write storage"
[add_labels]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#adding-cluster-id-labels-to-metrics_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Adding cluster ID labels to metrics"

> ### Method B: Scrap OCP metrics from RHOSO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Method B: Scrape OCP metrics from RHOSO
```

> As an alternative to write the different metrics to a single store, it's

Reviewer 3: I might be overthinking it. But the sentence isn't strictly true. "As an alternative to write the metrics to a single store" ... you propose to write them to a single store again.

Reviewer: Agreed, we should instead insist on push vs pull model.

# Observability of OpenShift on OpenStack

This document explains how it is possible to correlate OpenStack and OpenShift
metrics to have a better view of the stack and help troubleshoot issues
affecting your clusters.

> This document focuses on Red Hat OpenShift Services for OpenStack (RHOSO, also

Reviewer 4: RHOSO = Red Hat Openstack Services on Openshift

Author: woops

   filling up disk space). In `/etc/default/prometheus`, add the following
   line:

```
ARGS='--enable-feature=remote-write-receiver --storage.tsdb.retention.time=1d'
```

1. Enable and restart the Prometheus systemd unit
2. Add a security group rule to allow HTTPS (port 443)
3. Setup Caddy with (`/etc/caddy/Caddyfile`):

```Caddyfile
https://external-prometheus.example {

    basicauth {
        # caddy hash-password
        user hashed-password
    }

    reverse_proxy http://localhost:9090
}
```
-->

We will assume that the external Prometheus is reachable at the URL
`https://external-prometheus.example`.

#### Set up remote-write from RHOSO's telemetry-operator

Telemetry should be enabled in the RHOSO environment. If it is not the case,
refer to the
[documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openstack_services_on_openshift/18.0/html/customizing_the_red_hat_openstack_services_on_openshift_deployment/rhoso-observability_custom_dataplane#rhoso-observability_rhoso-observability).

<!--
Essentially, enabling telemetry boils down to flipping a property of the
openstackcontrolplane object:

```bash

> oc patch OpenStackControlPlane/controlplane --type merge -p '{"spec":{"telemetry":{"enabled": true, "template":{"ceilometer":{"enabled": true}}}}}'

Reviewer 5: I needed to enable metricStorage as well, but I don't know if it was my deployment thing or not.
```suggestion
oc -n openstack patch OpenStackControlPlane/controlplane --type merge -p '{"spec":{"telemetry":{"enabled": true, "template":{"ceilometer":{"enabled": true}, "metricStorage":{"enabled": true}}}}}'
```

Reviewer 4: Telemetry isn't enabled by default, since you need to have cluster-observability-operator installed first. (As noted below)

```
-->

> [!NOTE]
Make sure you have the Cluster Observability Operator installed in the
OpenShift cluster running the OpenStack control plane, as this is a requirement
for the OpenStack Telemetry Operator. Follow [these
directions](https://github.com/openstack-k8s-operators/architecture/blob/main/examples/dt/uni01alpha/control-plane.md#cluster-observability-operator)
to install it.

To check that the telemetry machinery is correctly installed, issue this
command:

```bash
oc -n openstack get monitoringstacks metric-storage -o yaml
```

The `monitoringstacks` CRD being installed is a good indicator that telemetry
is functional.

Before configuring remote-write in RHOSO's telemetry operator, create a secret
in the `openstack namespace` containing the HTTPS client certificates for
authenticating to Prometheus. We'll call it `mtls-bundle`:

```bash
oc --namespace openstack \
    create secret generic mtls-bundle \
        --from-file=./ca.crt \
        --from-file=osp-client.crt \
        --from-file=osp-client.key
```

Then, edit the controlplane configuration to setup the metric storage:

```bash

> oc edit openstackcontrolplane/controlplane

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
oc -n openstack edit openstackcontrolplane/controlplane
```

```

Let the change propagate and verify that you receive OpenShift metrics in the
external Prometheus.

[ocp_docs]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#configuring_remote_write_storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Configuring the monitoring stack"
[create_cluster_monitoring_config]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#creating-cluster-monitoring-configmap_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Creating a cluster monitoring config map"
[setup_remote_write]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#configuring-remote-write-storage_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Configuring remote write storage"
[add_labels]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.17/observability/monitoring/configuring-the-monitoring-stack.html#adding-cluster-id-labels-to-metrics_configuring-the-monitoring-stack "Adding cluster ID labels to metrics"

### Method B: Scrape OCP metrics from RHOSO

As opposed to Remote-Write, this solution maintains the traditional direction

> of the HTTP calls from the observer to the observed object ("pull model").

Reviewer: What are the parenthesis for? Was it supposed to link somewhere?

In this example, we will only request two metrics: `kube_node_info` and
`kube_persistentvolume_info` (see the `params.match[]` query below).

While connected to the RHOSO cluster, apply this manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.rhobs/v1alpha1
kind: ScrapeConfig
metadata:
  labels:
    service: metricStorage
  name: sos1-federated
  namespace: openstack
spec:
  params:
    'match[]':
    - '{__name__=~"kube_node_info|kube_persistentvolume_info"}'
  metricsPath: '/federate'
  authorization:
    type: Bearer
    credentials:
      name: ocp-federated
      key: token
  scheme: HTTPS # or HTTP
  scrapeInterval: 30s
  staticConfigs:
  - targets:
    - prometheus-k8s-federate-openshift-monitoring.apps.openshift.example # This is the URL fetched previously
  # add a tlsConfig stanza in case the endpoint is HTTPS but uses a custom CA
```

Don't forget to make the token available as a secret (in the example above, the name is `ocp-federated`):

```bash

> oc -n openstack ceate secret generic ocp-federated --from-literal=token=<the token fetched previously>

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
oc -n openstack create secret generic ocp-federated --from-literal=token=<the token fetched previously>
```

```

Once the new scrapeconfig propagates, the requested OpenShift metrics will be

> accessible for querying in RHOSO's OpenShift UI.

Reviewer 5: Is "OpenShift UI" on purpose or should it be "Prometheus UI". I'm not familiar enough yet as I'm still configuring RHOSO to get prometheus running.

Reviewer 5: I think it was correct after seeing the RHOSO telemetry depends on OpenShift observability framework.
